foreign
you can choose to think like oh it's
good and I want it or you can choose to
think it's bad and I'm Gonna Want It
secretly but actually I'm gonna try to
avoid it
or you can say wow this is the way this
system works and how do I use it and
accept the constraints of it in a way
that allow me to be even more creative
than I would be without it welcome to
the art of accomplishment where we
explore how deepening connection with
ourselves and others leads to creating
the life we want with enjoyment and ease
I'm Brett Kistler here today with my
co-host Joe Hudson
today we're going to talk about money
now money is a really sticky subject
it's very emotional for a lot of people
and people have all kinds of projections
and misconceptions around it and it can
be a really tricky subject we're going
to break this up into two episodes the
first episode we're going to talk about
a common misconception that people have
which is that money is our savior and
that if we just had more of it it would
solve all of our problems in the second
episode we're going to go into the
opposite misconception which is that
money is evil and the cause of all of
our problems and that it should be
avoided at all costs
so Joe to get started what makes people
have different ideas of what money is
I think it's because nobody knows what
money is
there's one level in which you can look
at money and say it's a complete
illusion right it's an agreement that a
whole bunch of people made and said this
thing has value
and it has value because a lot of people
say that it has value
and then on another level money is this
thing that buys you stuff that you want
it's a a great tool for
creation and or a great tool for
manifesting things
but I don't think really very few of us
understand what money is I I know that
the deeper I look into money the more
that I I see about it the more I
understand it the less I realize I truly
know what it is so what is not money
that people think it is
and what is money not that's it yeah
that's a great question what is money
not
well I think the thing that people
subconsciously think it is is money is
Love or Money is power or money is
their Father's Love or their mother's
love or and I think that is the
subconscious misinterpretation of money
that gets
that creates a lot of confusion for
people I remember this one time when I
was in out of all places El Salvador and
I was in a hammock and I was reading
about how WhatsApp had gone public and
this is back a while ago when I was a
venture capitalist and
the story was how this massive success
happened with this small investment and
how there was this one venture
capitalist who had uh
kind of parted ways with his
company just so that he could invest in
this
and I remember it just hit me like a gut
punch in the stomach and I immediately
stopped and said oh what what is this
feeling
and I closed my eyes and I just traced
the feeling back to the first time that
I felt it and I remember like oh man
I've made money a surrogate from My
Father's Love
I had you know had a relationship with
my father
early on where his love was not
something that I could get easily and so
money had become this thing that I
couldn't get easily
and the promise of money like the
promise of my father's love was
something that would make me whole again
at least I thought it would
and it wasn't my first iteration with
Maya my first iteration with money was
that money was evil
and that was also when I was really
angry at my father
so it's it's like I started to draw the
the I started to put points together to
realize that my relationship with money
and then I discovered most other people
I meet their relationship with money
often
follows a pattern of their relationship
with the love of their parents or the
relationship with love with authority or
their relationship of
of something important in their early
childhood and that love is money has
become a surrogate for whatever
relationship that is what are what are
some other things that money can become
a surrogate for like I said relationship
with authority relationship with parents
it can in in that aspect and there's
another another aspect of money can
become a surrogate for Security money
can become a surrogate for community
money can become a surrogate for power
or empowerment
money can become a surrogate for
experience itself yeah it seems like one
one thing that can happen is that we can
we can sort of build this belief that
once we have enough money we'll be able
to solve not only our problems but other
people's problems around us
uh and then end up in some really weird
relationship Dynamics with those people
yeah as a result yeah and it goes both
ways too right that we can start
accumulating enough money where people
around us think that they can they can
get their problem solved through the
money that we have
and that usually breeds a lot of
distrust so how can we tell if you know
the the difference between you know a
healthy relationship with money and
you know earning money finding value in
our work finding value in what we do and
you know having having enough to have
our needs met and how do we tell the
difference between that and sort of this
like Hungry Ghost aspect of
using money as a surrogate for something
that money can never fill yeah the
interesting thing is that the mind can
tell us that we don't have enough money
all the time and there's always evidence
for it
I remember at this one point when I was
doing this practice a gratitude practice
every day about what I did have because
it I was constantly thinking about what
I didn't have
and this is like I don't know early 30s
or something and I and I started to
I started just be everyday appreciative
for extended period of time of the
things that I did have and I saw my
whole world and aspect of money change
and one day I was driving a car
and I had had contact with like two or
three billionaires in my life at that
point and um
I was driving the car my thought process
turned to how I needed more money or you
know some sort of coveting some sort of
something like that and I thought to
myself oh you know the billionaires I
know they think this way too
I'm a billionaire
it was such this strange thought like
it's nonsensical but it was just like oh
I have the same reality as a billionaire
no matter how much money they have or
how little money I have we're both
walking around the world having the same
thought process
so it's really hard to use the mind to
feel like you have enough money but and
logically if you want to use the mind to
find out if you have enough money
if you are alive right now and you're
well fed and you have a home over your
and on some level you have enough money
there's this crazy lie that says I don't
have enough money because x y and z
but enough money is that you have your
basic needs met is enough money
if you don't have your basic needs met
then then there's a pretty good argument
that you don't have enough money
so logically the whole thing can be
deconstructed pretty quickly the other
way you think about money is oh if I
have enough money then I get what I want
whatever that thing is that I want when
nobody can do that because money can't
actually Supply everything that you want
so in that way you'll never have enough
money
so what's really clear is for you to
have a intellectually if you're going to
have a relationship with money that's
peaceful it's really important to be
able to separate
what you want from money
and money being only one Avenue to get
there yeah I can see a relation to this
in business uh
where the there can be a belief
you know even even as revenues are
increasing that you just need more money
to be able to you know you need to be
able to meet this opportunity or solve
that need or you know saturate some
Market
and
we could always be living in that story
in our personal life it could be you
know I just need I need a house with an
office and a desk so I can do my writing
yeah you know I need quiet space I need
XYZ
and then once we become attached to
something that we've gotten then we need
that and we can't imagine not having it
so then we need to continue to have that
Baseline amount of amount of money
and so that seems to be part of this
like this treadmill of
feeling like what I have is not enough
and what I really need is the next thing
Ergo I need more money yeah right and
this is a a really natural human
condition it not the needing more money
the new more money piece is just
something that's
it's the way that our modern society
turns the story around the basic human
condition and there's something basic in
the human condition that says
oh there's something that more I can be
doing there's something that I more I
can achieve there's something that I
should be doing so that I'm safe I it's
just if you ever look at mice they're
the same way they don't have the thought
process behind it potentially
most likely but they do have kind of
this like get up and go like oh I got to
do something I gotta do something I
gotta do something and
the way that our society works is that
money is the most obvious way to do
something
and when you can flip that switch when
you can say oh it's not resources it's
resourcefulness that I need
then everything can open up just the
idea that you need money to do something
is a limiting belief system you know
there's people who started their
businesses from nothing so what did they
need to start their business apparently
nothing
and
there's other people who very wisely say
oh you know being capitalized is a
really important part of my business so
I'm going to go out and get a whole
bunch of money because it's important
for growing my business
and both of those two things can be a
very sane approach but when it becomes
insane is when you think resources will
solve for resourcefulness it'll never
work and I I've walked into so many
companies and so many homes
with so many people who think that
resources will make a difference and it
doesn't I mean you look at
all the lottery winners and they have
the resources but it doesn't make a
difference and it's gone soon
and then you see people who have nothing
and they're resourceful and they and
they get the things that they're after
in the world
but the life isn't set up for us to get
everything we want and definitely money
isn't set up you know at its basic
construct it's set up to be deficient
meaning that the monetary system
that we have is
basically it can't
the amount of money out there can't pay
for the interest on top of it that is
out there so there's always a shortage
of it the system is built that way
just as our internal system is built
that way meaning that we as human beings
have a tendency to like almost a natural
urge
to feel like there's something that we
have to do
and something more that we have to
accomplish
and what's really weird is if you meet
somebody
who doesn't have that
there's kind of one of two options one
they're depressed or
they've become acquiescent and in
another way there's so fewer number of
them that actually are quite at peace
they've done a lot of work
to really feel into that discomfort and
to channel it in a different direction
yeah that reminds me of sort of this
there's this neurobiological aspect of
loss aversion where when we experience a
loss we experience it as like twice as
intense as an equal game which sort of
biases us towards
always wanting to gain more
so it sounds like what you're what
you're describing as this like gratitude
practice is
kind of gets like beneath the root of
that the more that you are able to
appreciate what you have the less you're
stuck in the treadmill
which then means you're less in fear
because
you start to see more more of the
possible solution space than
just the ones that money would like the
opportunities that money would open up
for you correct and I think there's
another aspect of that which is just as
interesting which is
if we motivate ourselves in the world
through fear then we're very scared to
let go of the fear because then we think
we'll be unmotivated right so a lot of
people if they really deeply confront
that kind of itch that they can never
scratch
they're scared to lose it because
they're scared that they'll you know be
a couch potato drinking beer
and what's really interesting is where
does Action come from if it doesn't come
from that fear where does Action come
from
if you feel secure yeah that seems
related to how a lot of our
you know our activities that we might
intrinsically enjoy can get wrapped up
in money and we might think that they're
not worth doing if we're not getting
paid
or we might we might not feel like we're
going to have
you know value ascribed To Us by Society
if nobody's willing to pay us for the
thing that we want that we want to do or
vice versa I know plenty of artists who
lose their desire to be an artist when
they're getting paid for it like it
completely changes their whole enjoyment
of the activity once they're getting
paid
it puts a pressure on them and then they
feel like they have to perform and then
the having to perform takes all that joy
out yeah yeah because once you start
depending upon
what you're doing to make money then
you're going to start forming the thing
you do to be doing it in a way that gets
money so you're going to be more
critical of your performance
and more critical in this like Market
aspect of what people are willing to pay
for
rather than letting what is flowing
through you to just freely flow I'm not
sure if that's even the healthiest
version to just let what's naturally
moving through you to freely flow
meaning
you know Shakespeare wrote an iambic
pentameter that that's like that's some
crazy constraint that is some crazy like
oh my God I have to make everything fit
into this 10 syllable blah blah blah and
and yet accepting that constraint it
increased the creativity or I think
about
Michelangelo and painting the top of the
Sistine Chapel you know one of the
holiest places on a planet and what does
he paint
he paints you know man uh God reaching
with all of his might to touch man to be
in connection with man and man kind of
laid back not even willing to lift a
finger
uh what a commentary to say like humans
aren't even willing to lift a finger
maybe even the people here in this
church right are not even willing to
lift a finger to touch God
and how do you get away with doing that
right how do you get away with painting
this on the top of the game paid to
paint this on the top of the Sistine in
the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel it's
like
right like on some level seeing the
constraints of money is freedom and and
if you learn how to work within those
constraints it creates a creativity
that's amazing and so as long as money
is here
you can choose to think like oh it's
good and I want it or you can choose to
think it's bad and I'm Gonna Want It
secretly but actually I'm gonna try to
avoid it
or you can say wow this is the way this
system works and how do I use it and
accept the constraints of it in a way
that allow me to be even more creative
than I would be without it how can we
accept the way the system works and
continue to work in it to our benefit
while being conscious of any
any systemic you know like any inbuilt
like I guess you could say Injustice in
the system Injustice or just like
inefficiencies are just like
without buying into that the way the
system works is the optimal way we could
have a financial system that's a great
question so by no means am I saying okay
we should all just accept the way that
the system works and not you know not
move to change it
what I'm saying more precisely is uh
that it's very healthy to accept the way
that the system works even if you want
to change it
it's very much like if you're
interacting with another human
like you can not accept the way that
they work or you can accept the way that
they work even if you're asking them to
be different even if you are
approaching them in a way that is going
to get
you know get a response that you don't
want like asking somebody to be
different asking something to be
different instead of accepting them is a
very inefficient path
to having people transform or money
transform or the system to transform
right if I'm like screw you this
shouldn't work [__] you if you do this
thing like why aren't you doing this
thing that's not a really great way to
get you to change right if you're if
it's more like I love you and I accept
you and this makes me uncomfortable and
and I and I would prefer that we
interact in this way that's like a far
more effective way to do it and it takes
a lot less out of me and it's the same
way with changing a society
it's acceptance somehow is conflated as
acceptance means that I am not going to
draw boundaries or I'm not going to ask
for things to change or I'm not going to
do things to change it
acceptance is this is how it is at this
moment and I'm not going to fight how it
is in this moment
I'm going to work to change it for the
next moment is 100 possible with the
acceptance right right so something else
you kind of touched on there was how
this affects interpersonal relationships
and so I'm I'm curious how like having
having a concept for money and we're
talking right now about the particular
concept of like money is good and that
it's going to solve all of our problems
how does that get in the way of our
relationships and the way that we view
each other
and like you know the shame that we
might approach a relationship with or
the Judgment or admiration money is the
kinkiest thing on the planet it's like
man I at least on the west coast you can
sit down and you can ask somebody about
their sexual preferences what's going on
there like what kind of things they like
and they're more likely to tell you
about that stuff than they are going to
tell you about your credit their credit
card debt or how much they make like it
is the kinkiest thing it is and it's an
incredible cause of disconnection in
ourselves and others right to admit that
you're poor or to admit that you're rich
both have a certain level of shame in
them that people that make it so people
don't even communicate that stuff
right people get really uncomfortable
I'm very open with like my money
situation oh this is how much I made
this is what I've done and you know with
friends and and it's just you can just
see the discomfort you know it doesn't
stop me but you can see the discomfort
on their face like
it's just not something that we want to
talk about because it it brings up
feelings of disconnection and shame in
everybody it's it is the kinkiest thing
right now on the planet is money it's
amazing and it's
and really it's just I mean the system
is not benign for any by any stretch but
it's
it's a tool with pluses and minuses and
it's a tool that can be changed
and yet it it has become like a god or
deity in the world it's amazing it's an
amazing thing and and and I even
hesitate to say all that stuff because
then it's like somebody whose mind is
like money is bad they'll just hook onto
that and go oh yeah
my money to see the people make it make
it a deity like you can't
getting a rich man into heaven is like
getting a camel through the eye of a
needle
and in my world it's not a rich man or a
poor man
that has a hard time finding Joy it's a
person who's focused on money whether it
be
if I get more of it I'll be happy or I'm
unhappy because I don't have it or money
is bad it's just whatever whenever money
becomes the
the conscious or unconscious
driver of things it's very hard to find
Joy or you know which is how I'm
translating Heaven yeah yeah you point
it to a lot of the shame that's around
money like the shame of having money in
the shame of not having money the shame
of you know not having earned money that
you have in some particular way that you
feel makes you deserve it but then
there's also on the other side there's
like pride and there can be Pride to
having a lot of money and then building
a self-concept around that there can
also be Pride to having no money
um and sort of flexing on that there's
just no what's the difference between
somebody having Pride around their
around their money situation whatever it
be and and somebody having shame around
it to me those are two sides of the same
coin there's an empowerment stance
around money which is like oh I
I will be me no matter what the money
situation is then I will do I will have
my freedom because I do
no matter what the money situation is
that's an empowerment thing
and if that's the state if that's the
stance internal stance not faked but
actually owned
then what happens to your pride or your
shame around money kind of closing in on
this on this segment on you know money
being good that concept of money being
good I'm curious you you pointed earlier
to how like you can change the system if
you work within the system
recognize that the system is there maybe
not working entirely within it but
recognizing that this system exists and
that you navigate the system and you can
get your needs met
and then you can change the system
how has the system changed you in that
Journey yeah I mean I do think the
system has changed me
and I don't think I can even point to
all the ways that it it has I think
that's a really hard
I don't think I could fully understand
the ramifications of all the ways that
um this the monetary system has changed
me
what's fascinating about that question
for me is you know I'm raising two girls
and I want to raise them with a healthy
relationship around money
and part of what I want to teach them is
that the money's always here
um when you need it and that attitude is
the best way to make sure that money is
always here when you need it also to
respect money to see it as a powerful
force
um
man-made or otherwise it's a powerful
force in the in the world and to have
give it its due respect
and also to see the cosmic joke of money
and and to just see that it's like a
representation of human consciousness
and that
how many flows is very much like how
human consciousness flows the stock
market is in a weird way it's kind of
the mental Outlook of a portion of our
society and the way that a portion of
our society feels like I I'm pretty
confident if you took all the caffeine
out of all the major cities that we
would have a financial depression if the
stock market would go down
so it's just this really fascinating
thing and I want them to experience it
the same way you would experience a
flower or a cactus or a or any landscape
but not to feel like it has power over
them and and to be a victim to it or to
hate it or to love it love it in the way
of like greed not love it in the way of
like having love for it the way you
might be able to have love for a flower
or a tree
and so to some degree like I feel like
all that's healthy and on another degree
you know it it is a system in our world
that and any system in our world affects
the way that we think it doesn't matter
if it's the architecture that we live in
and it's really hard to be able to
determine how that architecture affects
our consciousness
you know I see people with a ton of
money and there's kind of ways that
they start doing things that are more
about their own entertainment typically
they they get out of touch obviously
with people who don't have that level of
money just like people who are really
poor out of touch with the issues of
somebody who's really wealthy
so there's some of those obvious things
right like I like to this day I will
I will spend a part of every week going
and interacting with um
people who I would not normally interact
with and sometimes those people are
homeless and sometimes those people are
very poor and sometimes those people are
very wealthy just so that I can
constantly
um feel how how different perspectives
live and and to be a part of that but I
don't think I can really say
specifically with any kind of integrity
all the ways in which
money affects me and what's also
interesting to me is that what I've
noticed is that as my relationship with
myself changes my relationship with
money naturally changes too
so the more that I can love myself the
more that I love money as it is
the more that I feel empowered the more
I feel empowered with money the more
that I am grateful the more I have an
attitude of gratitude with my money the
more that I feel being of service is a
joy the more I'm of service with my
money
so it's just a really fascinating thing
of like is it a reflection or is it the
engineer or how is it both what's that
dance
and I you know I've never lived without
it so I can't I'm a fish in water I
can't see what it's done yeah well thank
you Joe that wraps up this segment and
keep listening for the following segment
um the belief that money is bad
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment
if you enjoyed what you heard today
please subscribe and rate US on your
podcast app we'd love your feedback so
feel free to send us questions or
comments you can reach out to us join
our newsletter or check out our courses
at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]
foreign